Salinity and temperature are two key roles in water cycle and climate change. In this study we want to use principal component scores and loadings to understand the relationship these components have with observed variables, patterns of variations in the data captured by PC and which parameters are most prone to change with one variable (e.g. time). Using these two tools enables us to reduce the dimensions of large data sets and understand complex relationships in the data where different patterns of variation represented by different PCs relate differently to the observed variable.

We collected the temperature (measured by degrees Celsius) and salinity (measured by practical salinity units, i.e. psu) data of Pacific Ocean in different days, locations and depths in 2020 from argo and used pressure to represent depth. The pressure is measured in decibars (dbar), and 1 dbar very closely corresponds to 1 meter of depth. After cleaning the data set, the total sample size is 50156. Since the units of variables are different and we want to interpret the PC more easily, we will do the mean centering for each column of the data. 

First we checked the mean profile of temperature against pressure (depth of the ocean). We observed that the mean temperature of the water drops rapidly as the pressure increases until the pressure reaches 600 decibars, then it started to decrease slowly. This result aligns well with our expectations because the surface of the ocean is greatly influenced by sun radiation, the temperature has a sharp change. If we go deeper, the heat conduction and convection have only a diminishing influence on the water, therefore the temperature will decrease slowly and stabilize at a certain depth.

On the other hand, the plot of the mean salinity against pressure exhibits a more interesting and complicated pattern. The mean salinity surges to 34.76 psu from 0 to 150 decibars in pressure, it then declines fast until the pressure increases to around 650 decibars, when the mean salinity reaches a minimum of 34.37 psu. After that the mean salinity increases approximately linearly. Multiple factors can cause such a trend like evaporation, melting of ice and river flow.

Next we checked the PC loadings of temperature against pressure. The PC1 is the direction which explains the most portion of variance in the model, and the temperature PC1 loading indicates how much the temperature variable contributes to PC1. From the plot of temperature PC1 loading against pressure, we can observe that temperature PC1 loading displays very similar decreasing trend as temperature with the increase of pressure, and the loading is very close to 0 after 1400 psu. Therefore, as pressure increases, temperature will become less and less significant in influencing PC1, ultimately contributing negligibly or not at all beyond a certain threshold. The salinity PC1 loading will slightly increase and achieve a maximum of 0.145 at 100 psu pressure, and then will decrease slowly, stay at around 0.08 eventually. The result indicates that salinity will have a constant positive contribution to PC1 after a certain depth.

Besides pressure, we also want to examine other factors which will influence temperature and salinity such as location and time. At this stage we will plot PC scores against these factors. The PC1 score changes with the observed variable can indicate how the major pattern of variation in the data relates to the observed variable. 

The plot of temperature PC1 score versus days is almost a constant straight line, indicating that the variation captured by PC1 is not significantly correlated with time, hence it may incorporate factors that are relatively stable across different days. The PC1 score remains nearly constant from 10° S to 5° N, indicating that the variation captured by PC1 does not have a significant correlation with locations in the vicinity of the equator. This may due to the direct and intense solar radiation these areas receive throughout the year. The sun's rays hit here more directly and heat these regions more evenly than other areas.

As we move further from the equator, either north or south, the PC1 score will keep decreasing approximately linearly. In regions north of 23° N and south of 33° S, the score has a larger and larger absolute magnitude in the negative direction. This corresponds to the regions displaying more seasonal and geographical variations in terms of temperature. The plot of salinity PC1 scores against the above factors exhibit a similar trend as the temperature, so we will not discuss here.

If we look at the plot of temperature PC1 score against longitude, it’s just a V curve with a minimum score of -17 when the longitude is 170. Basically all of our plots have a nice and simple form. However, there are so many factors that can influence the ocean temperature like ocean currents, distribution of land and prevailing winds. We can take them into consideration in future research.

In conclusion, the ocean temperature and salinity are very vulnerable to the change of depth. The temperature of regions far away from the equator are more vulnerable to changes in latitude than those near the equator. The temperature and salinity PC1, PC2 and PC3 scores are all not affected by the time change from the plot, so the time has the least impact to ocean temperature and salinity.
