High blood pressure is a prevalent medical problem where the force of blood against the walls of the arteries is consistently too high. It has been found that genetic, environmental and physical factors are all associated with the level of blood pressure. In this study we used several regression models to see which one can best capture the influence of age, gender and physical factors on blood pressure level.  We also used the plots of the best regression model to examine how each explanatory variable contributes to the blood pressure level with other predictors fixed.
     
We first gathered the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) data 2017 from National Center for Health Statistics, and the total number of the records is 5856. The response variable is the first reading of blood pressure (measured in mm Hg), while the explanatory variables are gender, age and body mass index (BMI). In order to better interpret the interactions between the covariates, we used centering technique to recode the sex variable. Since the proportion of women is 0.515, the gender variable was encoded as -0.515 for men and 0.485 for women.
     
If we use the linear regression model, the R-squared is 0.261 and the AIC is 40,950. The R-squared is very low because linear relationship is too simple to explain the variances of the data. We will compare the AIC with other regression models later. The covariates might also have some interactions, e.g., men’s BMIs are typically higher than women’s so there must be some interaction between gender and BMI. That’s why we need to use more advanced regression models.
     
We then used the product of covariates to model the interaction and AIC as the criterion of model selection. The result shows that the model with the full interaction has the lowest AIC (40,788). However, if we only model in the interaction between gender and BMI, the AIC is the highest (40,956). Hence we not only need to consider pairwise interactions but also integrate the full interactions in our model.
     
Modeling interactions alone is not sufficient to interpret the non-linearity of the data yet. Generalized Additive Model (GAM), which uses inverse of function g to map the conditional mean of response variable to the linear combination of basis functions, can capture more non-linear patterns in the data. A smoothness penalty term is used because we want the basis functions to be as smooth as possible, thus reducing the chance of overfitting. In our GAM we used B spline basis function, which is a collection of piecewise polynomial functions. 
     
Following this, we used B spline with different degrees to model the data with interactions. Given that the gender variable is categorical, we only applied spline functions on age and BMI. The degrees of the B Spline and interaction models were determined by grid search. It turned out that full interactions among nonlinear age (smoothed by spline functions of 6 degrees), BMI and gender has the lowest AIC (40,724), so we only applied smooth terms to the age variable.  
After selecting the regression model above, we then examined the patterns and trends of the blood pressure level versus age with BMI fixed for both men and women. For those individuals who do not have obesity problems (BMI under 30), both men and women exhibit an increase trend in blood pressure level after age 35. Men register higher blood pressure levels than women of the same BMI up until the age of 65. However, women’s blood pressure levels rise at a faster rate and surpass men that of men right after 65. For each fixed BMI under 30, the general patterns and trends of blood pressure levels are similar but with slight differences. For example, individuals with a BMI of 25 exhibit lower blood pressure compared to those with a BMI of 30 until age 45, and converge to the same level gradually, then surpass those with a BMI of 30 after a certain age at last.

Nevertheless, for obese people (particularly with a BMI over 40) the blood pressure level might exhibit a decrease at certain ages. For instance, if we set BMI at 45 (Class III Obese), men’s blood pressure levels will experience a slight drop between the ages of 35 and 45, followed by a plunge between the ages of 56 and 75. The blood pressure levels of women with the same BMI exceeds men at an earlier age (52) than non-obese group, and will also drop after age 64. However, both genders will increase quickly again after 75. Figure 1 shows the trend of blood pressure levels against age with BMI of 27 and BMI of 45 for both men and women, from which we are assured that our GAM model captures the non-linear relationship within the data much better than simple linear regression.

From the summary results of our GAM, the p-value associated with BMI is 0.002, so we are very confident that the covariate is significant. Its coefficient is 0.4889, indicating a positive effect on blood pressure.  Five of the six smooth terms related to age are also significant. Yet, only a few of the p-values related to interaction terms are significant, we can use PCA or kernel principal regression to address this problem in future studies.

In conclusion, our GAM displays a lower AIC compared to other models, and it can interpret the interactions between covariates and non-linearity between response and explanatory variables. The blood pressure level will increase during the most time of aging process for individuals with a normal BMI, and people with a larger BMI usually exhibit higher blood pressure. Men typically exhibit higher blood pressure readings than women until reaching a certain age, then will be surpassed after that point. However, the trends will change dramatically for obese people, especially those with a BMI over 40.
